# On the Difficulty of Translating Free-Order Case-Marking Languages 

This repository contains the MT challenge set used in the paper:

"[On the Difficulty of Translating Free-Order Case-Marking Languages]()"\
A. Bisazza, A. Ustun, S. Sportel. To appear in TACL (2021). 

Using a variety of synthetic languages, we studied whether free-order case-marking languages (such as Russian, Turkish or Tamil) are more difficult to machine-translate than their fixed-order counterparts (e.g. English). For details and findings on Neural Machine Translation models (specifically, bi-LSTM and Transformers) see the paper.

## Challenge Set

This is a benchmark of 7,200 English-French sentence pairs generated by a simple (synchronous) context-free grammar.
Each sentence is designed so that swapping subject and object leads to another plausible sentence, for example:

* (1a) The president attacks the ministers / *Le président attaque les ministres*
* (1b) The ministers attack the president / *Les ministres attaquent le président*

* (2a) The teacher does not respect the student / *L'enseignant ne respecte pas l'étudiant*
* (2b) The student does not respect the teacher / *L'étudiant ne respecte pas l'enseignant*

Each English sentence and its reverse are included in the test set together with the respective translation.

The idea is to prevent the MT model to rely on semantic and collocational cues to disambiguate the role of an argument during translation. Thus only syntactic cues like word order or inflection can be used.

## English Variants

In addition to the English side of the corpus, we provide a number of synthetic English variants, obtained by modifying the order of main consitutents or by adding artificial case markers.\
Example of the SOV, no case marking variant:

* The president the ministers attack / *Le président attaque le ministres* 
* The ministers the president attack / *Les ministres attaquent le président*

Example of the SOV, overt case marking variant:

* The president.*nsubj.sg* the minister.*dobj.pl* attack.*dobj.pl.nsubj.sg* / *Le président attaque le ministres*
* The minister.*nsubj.pl* the president.*dobj.sg* attack.*dobj.sg.nsubj.pl* / *Le ministres attaquent le président*

The French target side (*fr.txt*) is never modified and can be paired with any of the source variants.

The synthetic language generator is explained in more detail and released here:
https://github.com/573phn/rnn_typology

## Repository Structure

**challenge-orig/** contains the original English-French sentences\
**challenge-variants/** contains a number of English variants, namely:

* different (fixed) orders of main constituents (svo, sov, vso, vos)
* random order of main constitutents (random)
* shuffle all words (shuffle)
* with case marking
  * na-d: nominative/accusative deterministic (overt suffixes)
  * na-d-f:  nominative/accusative deterministic (fusional/implicit suffixes)
  * na-d-f3: nominative/accusative deterministic (fusional/implicit suffixes with 3 declensions)
  * na-a: nominative/accusative ambiguous or syncretic (overt suffixes)
* no case marking (none)

For the random and shuffle conditions, two versions obtained with different random seeds are provided (seed5, seed10).

## Credits

If you use this dataset, please cite the paper above!


